Implementer's guide: Approval Voting Subsystem (#1691)
paritytech/polkadot: roadmap/implementers-guide/src/node/approval/approval-voting.md

# Approval Voting

## Protocol

Input:
  - `ApprovalVotingMessage::CheckAndImportAssignment`
  - `ApprovalVotingMessage::CheckAndImportApproval`
  - `ApprovalVotingMessage::ApprovedAncestor`

Output:
  - `ApprovalNetworkingMessage::DistributeAssignment`
  - `ApprovalNetworkingMessage::DistributeApproval`
  - `RuntimeApiMessage::Request`
  - `ChainApiMessage`
  - `AvailabilityRecoveryMessage::Recover`
  - `CandidateExecutionMessage::ValidateFromExhaustive`

## Functionality

> The approval voting subsystem is responsible for casting votes and determining approval of candidates and as a result, blocks.

Reviewer: Missing a verb here? `creates blocks.` or `approves blocks`?

Reviewer 2: maybe add a comma like so?
"[...] approval of candidates and, as a result, blocks."

This subsystem wraps a database which is used to store metadata about unfinalized blocks and the candidates within them. Candidates may appear in multiple blocks, and assignment criteria are chosen differently based on the hash of the block they appear in.

## Database Schema

The database schema is designed with the following goals in mind:
  1. To provide an easy index from unfinalized blocks to candidates
  1. To provide a lookup from candidate hash to approval status
  1. To be easy to clear on start-up. What has happened while we were offline is unimportant.
  1. To be fast to clear entries outdated by finality

Structs:

```rust
struct TrancheEntry {

>     tranche: DelayTranche,

Reviewer: The definition of delay tranche should be added here, rather than the disputes module:

> Assignment proceeds in loosely timed rounds called DelayTranches roughly 12 times faster than block production, in which validators send assignment notices until all candidates have enough checkers assigned. Assignment tracks when approval votes arrive too and assigns more checkers if some checkers run late.

    // assigned validators who have not yet approved, and the instant we received
    // their assignment.
    assignments: Vec<(ValidatorIndex, Tick)>,
}

struct OurAssignment {
  cert: AssignmentCert,
  tranche: DelayTranche,
  validator_index: ValidatorIndex,
  triggered: bool,
}

struct ApprovalEntry {
    tranches: Vec<TrancheEntry>, // sorted ascending by tranche number.
    backing_group: GroupIndex,
    // When the next wakeup for this entry should occur. This is either to
    // check a no-show or to check if we need to broadcast an assignment.

>     next_wakeup: Tick,

Reviewer: Should we not rather make this a push driven system with timeouts? That usually reduces complexity in the implementation.

Reviewer: I find it hard to justify introducing ticks (got to re-read it, I might have missed some details) - we are essentially implementing a coarse polling when futures and channels are available.

Author: How would you do it instead?

Author: The main thing I'm working around here is that we are dealing with these data:
  * Potentially many unfinalized blocks, forked with each other
  * Many candidates within those blocks, potentially with the same candidate appearing in multiple blocks
  * Assignments appearing for specific candidates in the context of particular blocks

For any particular `ApprovalEntry` we only want to poll the _first_ assignment that would time out as a no-show and not have a wakeup for each one.

Author: I suppose we could rewrite each `ApprovalEntry` to be its own `Future`, but the other thing I'm juggling is that we want this stuff to be persisted to disk as well, and we should prefer to write from a single task

Reviewer: Writing from a single task is either using a [`FuturesUnordered`](https://docs.rs/futures/0.3.7/futures/stream/struct.FuturesUnordered.html) which then guarantees that we are on the same task assuming either chaining of futures or sync writes. We could also use a write queue if that is a concern.

Iiuc `ApprovalEntry` could impl `Future` iteself, which then lives in a `ApprovalEntrySet` which acts like a timerwheel and consume the `rx` end of `mpsc` for additional entries or implement `Sink` to consume additional `Entry` items.

Author: No matter what, we still need the `Tick` because that's our basic unit of time for this protocol. But I will explore different architectures. I still think that what's laid out in this doc sounds easiest to implement from an ownership perspective.

    our_assignment: Option<OurAssignment>,
    assignments: Bitfield, // n_validators bits
    approved: bool,
}

struct CandidateEntry {
    candidate: CandidateReceipt,
    session: SessionIndex,
    // Assignments are based on blocks, so we need to track assignments separately
    // based on the block we are looking at.
    block_assignments: HashMap<Hash, ApprovalEntry>,
    approvals: Bitfield, // n_validators bits
}

struct BlockEntry {
    block_hash: Hash,
    session: SessionIndex,
    slot: SlotNumber,
    received_late_by: Duration,
    // random bytes derived from the VRF submitted within the block by the block
    // author as a credential and used as input to approval assignment criteria.
    relay_vrf_story: [u8; 32],
    // The candidates included as-of this block and the index of the core they are
    // leaving. Sorted ascending by core index.
    candidates: Vec<(CoreIndex, Hash)>,
    // A bitfield where the i'th bit corresponds to the i'th candidate in `candidates`.
    // The i'th bit is `true` iff the candidate has been approved in the context of

>     // this block. The block can be considered approved if the bitfield is equal to !0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // this block. The block can be considered approved if the bitfield is at least one bit set to `1`.
```

    approved_bitfield: Bitfield,
    rotation_offset: GroupIndex,
    children: Vec<Hash>,
}

// slot_duration * 2 + DelayTranche gives the number of delay tranches since the
// unix epoch.
type Tick = u64;

struct TrackerEntry 

struct StoredBlockRange(BlockNumber, BlockNumber)
```

In the schema, we map

```

> "StoredBlocks" => StoredBlockRange

Reviewer: Do the `"` have a meaning?

BlockNumber => Vec<BlockHash>
BlockHash => BlockEntry
CandidateHash => CandidateEntry
```

## Logic

In-memory state:

```rust
struct ApprovalVoteRequest {
  validator_index: ValidatorIndex,
  block_hash: Hash,
  candidate_index: u32,
}

struct State {
    earliest_session: SessionIndex,
    session_info: Vec<SessionInfo>,
    keystore: KeyStorePtr,
    wakeups: BTreeMap<Tick, Vec<(Hash, Hash)>>, // Tick -> [(Relay Block, Candidate Hash)]
    

>     // These are connected to each other.

Reviewer: Would be nice to get a reasoning here, why we store rx and tx in the same struct.

Reviewer: Reason is that the rx is used to `clone()` from.

    approval_vote_tx: mpsc::Sender<ApprovalVoteRequest>,
    approval_vote_rx: mpsc::Receiver<ApprovalVoteRequest>,
}
```

[`SessionInfo`](../../runtime/session_info.md)

> On start-up, we clear everything currently stored by the database. This is done by loading the `StoredBlockRange`, iterating through each block number, iterating through each block hash, and iterating through each candidate referenced by each block. Although this is O(n^3), we don't expect to have more than a few unfinalized blocks at any time and in extreme cases, a few thousand. The clearing operation should be relatively fast as a result.

Reviewer 3: It's not really `O(n^3)`, because the number of stored blocks in the range, the number of hashes for each block, and the number of candidates referenced per block all have differing cardinality. AFAICT these are entirely distinct, which makes the bound `O(n*o*p)`, and I (possibly naively) expect `o` and `p` to remain pretty small all the time.

Main loop:
  * Each iteration, select over all of
    * The next `Tick` in `wakeups`: trigger `wakeup_process` for each `(Hash, Hash)` pair scheduled under the `Tick` and then remove all entries under the `Tick`.
    * The next message from the overseer: handle the message as described in the [Incoming Messages section](#incoming-messages)
    * The next request from `approval_vote_rx`: handle with `issue_approval`

> ### Incoming Messages

Reviewer 3: I really like the detailed descriptions of what to do on each incoming message, but they tend to blend together. Might be worth adding h4 headers above each message's section.

> On receiving an `OverseerSignal::BlockFinalized(h)`, we fetch the block number `b` of that block from the ChainApi subsystem. We update our `StoredBlockRange` to begin at `b+1`. Additionally, we remove all block entries and candidates referenced by them up to and including `b`. Lastly, we prune out all descendents of `h` transitively: when we remove a `BlockEntry` with number `b` that is not equal to `h`, we recursively delete all the `BlockEntry`s referenced as children. We remove the `block_assignments` entry for the block hash and if `block_assignments` is now empty, remove the `CandidateEntry`.

Reviewer 3: `h` is used before definition; I'm not sure what you mean there, precisely.

    * If the cert kind is `RelayVRFDelay`, then we check if the VRF is valid for the validator's key with the input `block_entry.relay_vrf_story ++ cert.core_index.encode()` as described in [the approvals protocol section](../../protocol-approval.md#assignment-criteria). The cert can be ignored if the block did not cause inclusion of a candidate on that core index. Otherwise, this is a valid assignment for the included candidate. The delay tranche for the assignment is determined by reducing `(vrf.make_bytes().to_u64() % (session_info.n_delay_tranches + session_info.zeroth_delay_tranche_width)).saturating_sub(session_info.zeroth_delay_tranche_width)`.
    * `import_checked_assignment`
    * return the appropriate `VoteCheckResult` on the response channel.

On receiving a `CheckAndImportApproval(indirect_approval_vote, response_channel)` message:
  * Fetch the `BlockEntry` from the indirect approval vote's `block_hash`. If none, return `VoteCheckResult::Bad`.

>   * Fetch the `CandidateEntry` from the indirect approval vote's `candidate_index`. If the block did not trigger inclusion of enough candidates, return `VoteCheckResult::Bad`.

Reviewer: We should consider adding more variants to `VoteCheckResult` to allow better logging with a `fn is_bad(&self)` convenience method.

  * Construct a `SignedApprovalVote` using the candidate hash and check against the validator's approval key, based on the session info of the block. If invalid or no such validator, return `VoteCheckResult::Bad`.
  * Send `VoteCheckResult::Accepted`,
  * `import_checked_approval(BlockEntry, CandidateEntry, ValidatorIndex)`

On receiving an `ApprovedAncestor(Hash, BlockNumber, response_channel)`:
  * Iterate over the ancestry of the hash all the way back to block number given, starting from the provided block hash.
  * Keep track of an `all_approved_max: Option<Hash>`.
  * For each block hash encountered, load the `BlockEntry` associated. If any are not found, return `None` on the response channel and conclude.

>   * If the block entry has `approval_bitfield == !0` and `all_approved_max == None`, set `all_approved_max = Some(current_hash)`.

Reviewer: We should clearly define the notation if we want to use it (or maybe it is and I am just not aware).

  * If the block entry as `approval_bitfield != !0`, set `all_approved_max = None`.
  * After iterating all ancestry, return `all_approved_max`.

### Utility

> `import_checked_assignment`

Reviewer: Could we make these h4 headlines too?

## Protocol

Input:
  - `ApprovalVotingMessage::CheckAndImportAssignment`
  - `ApprovalVotingMessage::CheckAndImportApproval`
  - `ApprovalVotingMessage::ApprovedAncestor`

Output:
  - `ApprovalNetworkingMessage::DistributeAssignment`
  - `ApprovalNetworkingMessage::DistributeApproval`
  - `RuntimeApiMessage::Request`
  - `ChainApiMessage`
  - `AvailabilityRecoveryMessage::Recover`
  - `CandidateExecutionMessage::ValidateFromExhaustive`

## Functionality

The approval voting subsystem is responsible for casting votes and determining approval of candidates and as a result, blocks.

This subsystem wraps a database which is used to store metadata about unfinalized blocks and the candidates within them. Candidates may appear in multiple blocks, and assignment criteria are chosen differently based on the hash of the block they appear in.

## Database Schema

The database schema is designed with the following goals in mind:
  1. To provide an easy index from unfinalized blocks to candidates
  1. To provide a lookup from candidate hash to approval status
  1. To be easy to clear on start-up. What has happened while we were offline is unimportant.

>   1. To be fast to clear entries outdated by finality

Reviewer 4: It's maybe implicit when you talk about the unfinalized relay chain block here, but I needed maps between paraids and cores-when-included aka when declared available in preliminary draft: https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot/pull/1558/files#diff-e9db7842138e4616e3dd5824d7df2f9947e2dcc7570c5fc20d755ec6947ab98fR97-R112

Author: We use `CandidateEvents` for that.

Structs:

```rust
struct TrancheEntry {
    tranche: DelayTranche,
    // assigned validators who have not yet approved, and the instant we received
    // their assignment.

>     assignments: Vec<(ValidatorIndex, Tick)>,

Reviewer 4: Good.  :)  It took me quite a while to figure out that we needed this `Tick`, which corresponds to `AssignmentSignature::recieved` in https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot/pull/1558/files#diff-16fadbdcb87a7ecb8febad865d8ca383f4c913f4bf272307bdd93b7a0a3ab26cR229

}

struct OurAssignment {
  cert: AssignmentCert,
  tranche: DelayTranche,
  validator_index: ValidatorIndex,
  triggered: bool,
}

struct ApprovalEntry {
    tranches: Vec<TrancheEntry>, // sorted ascending by tranche number.
    backing_group: GroupIndex,
    // When the next wakeup for this entry should occur. This is either to
    // check a no-show or to check if we need to broadcast an assignment.
    next_wakeup: Tick,
    our_assignment: Option<OurAssignment>,
    assignments: Bitfield, // n_validators bits
    approved: bool,
}

struct CandidateEntry {
    candidate: CandidateReceipt,
    session: SessionIndex,
    // Assignments are based on blocks, so we need to track assignments separately
    // based on the block we are looking at.
    block_assignments: HashMap<Hash, ApprovalEntry>,
    approvals: Bitfield, // n_validators bits
}

struct BlockEntry {
    block_hash: Hash,
    session: SessionIndex,
    slot: SlotNumber,
    received_late_by: Duration,
    // random bytes derived from the VRF submitted within the block by the block
    // author as a credential and used as input to approval assignment criteria.

>     relay_vrf_story: [u8; 32],

Reviewer 4: We'll eventually want `relay_equivocations_story` too https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot/pull/1558/files#diff-e9db7842138e4616e3dd5824d7df2f9947e2dcc7570c5fc20d755ec6947ab98fR193 but that's separate from the relay_vrf_story field in this `BlockEntry`.  It's fine if we just delay that for now.

Author: https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot/issues/1901

    
    // These are connected to each other.
    approval_vote_tx: mpsc::Sender<ApprovalVoteRequest>,
    approval_vote_rx: mpsc::Receiver<ApprovalVoteRequest>,
}
```

[`SessionInfo`](../../runtime/session_info.md)

On start-up, we clear everything currently stored by the database. This is done by loading the `StoredBlockRange`, iterating through each block number, iterating through each block hash, and iterating through each candidate referenced by each block. Although this is `O(o*n*p)`, we don't expect to have more than a few unfinalized blocks at any time and in extreme cases, a few thousand. The clearing operation should be relatively fast as a result.

Main loop:
  * Each iteration, select over all of
    * The next `Tick` in `wakeups`: trigger `wakeup_process` for each `(Hash, Hash)` pair scheduled under the `Tick` and then remove all entries under the `Tick`.
    * The next message from the overseer: handle the message as described in the [Incoming Messages section](#incoming-messages)
    * The next request from `approval_vote_rx`: handle with `issue_approval`

### Incoming Messages

#### `OverseerSignal::BlockFinalized`

> On receiving an `OverseerSignal::BlockFinalized(h)`, we fetch the block number `b` of that block from the ChainApi subsystem. We update our `StoredBlockRange` to begin at `b+1`. Additionally, we remove all block entries and candidates referenced by them up to and including `b`. Lastly, we prune out all descendents of `h` transitively: when we remove a `BlockEntry` with number `b` that is not equal to `h`, we recursively delete all the `BlockEntry`s referenced as children. We remove the `block_assignments` entry for the block hash and if `block_assignments` is now empty, remove the `CandidateEntry`.

Reviewer 4: We just need to ensure anything we want remembered makes it on-chain by this point, but I think that's done here somewhere.

Author: haven't done the on-chain reporting stuff yet. Disputes will track a DB of all votes we've seen by validators.

Reviewer 4: I'd agree disputes provides a better venue for tracking this, thanks.

  * Send `VoteCheckResult::Accepted`,
  * `import_checked_approval(BlockEntry, CandidateEntry, ValidatorIndex)`

#### `ApprovalVotingMessage::ApprovedAncestor`

On receiving an `ApprovedAncestor(Hash, BlockNumber, response_channel)`:
  * Iterate over the ancestry of the hash all the way back to block number given, starting from the provided block hash.
  * Keep track of an `all_approved_max: Option<Hash>`.
  * For each block hash encountered, load the `BlockEntry` associated. If any are not found, return `None` on the response channel and conclude.
  * If the block entry's `approval_bitfield` has all bits set to 1 and `all_approved_max == None`, set `all_approved_max = Some(current_hash)`.
  * If the block entry's `approval_bitfield` has any 0 bits, set `all_approved_max = None`.
  * After iterating all ancestry, return `all_approved_max`.

### Utility

#### `import_checked_assignment`
  * Load the candidate in question and access the `approval_entry` for the block hash the cert references.

>   * Ensure the validator index is not part of the backing group for the candidate.

Reviewer 4: I suppose backers vote with their original backing announcement message since we do not distinguish the first backer.

#### `tranches_to_approve(approval_entry) -> tranches`
  * Determine the amount of tranches `n_tranches` our view of the protocol requires of this approval entry
    * First, take tranches until we have at least `session_info.needed_approvals`. Call the number of tranches taken `k`
    * Then, count no-shows in tranches `0..k`. For each no-show, we require another checker. Take new tranches until each no-show is covered, so now we've taken `l` tranches. e.g. if there are 2 no-shows, we might only need to take 1 additional tranche with >= 2 assignments. Or we might need to take 3 tranches, where one is empty and the other two have 1 assignment each.
    * Count no-shows in tranches `k..l` and for each of those, take tranches until all no-shows are covered. Repeat so on until either
      * We run out of tranches to take, having not received any assignments past a certain point. In this case we set `n_tranches` to a special value `ALL` which indicates that new assignments are needed.
      * All no-shows are covered. Set `n_tranches` to the number of tranches taken

>     * return `n_tranches`

Reviewer 4: You've written the algorithm as I defined it, but we should probably change this to add one tranche per no-show.

#### `check_approval(block_entry, approval_entry, n_tranches) -> bool`
  * If `n_tranches` is ALL, return false

>   * Otherwise, if all validators in `n_tranches` have approved, return `true`. If any validator in these tranches has not yet approved but is not yet considered a no-show, return `false`.

Reviewer 4: I needed `tranches_to_approve` and `check_approval` to be one method because `check_approval` knows about no-shows.
